= danengle's addition to will_paginate

I wanted my pagination links to render like the pagination on hulu.com. This is my first attempt at making that happen.

All that is needed is to add the form option to your will_paginate call. Simple and easy.

    <%= will_paginate :form => true %>

Pagination will now display like...

    <div class="pagination">
    	<span class="first_page disabled">&#171;</span>
    	<span class="previous_page disabled">&#139;</span>
    	< form method="get" action="/admin" style="display:inline;" class="will_paginate_form">
    		<input type="text" size="1" value="1" name="page"></input>
    	</form>
    	of
    	<a class="last_page" href="/admin?page=3">3</a>
    	<a class="next_page" rel="next" href="/admin?page=2">&#155;</a>
    </div>

My rspec foo needs some work, so I haven't added any additional tests yet. If anyone would like to help or give my some pointers on how best to get started, that would be awesome.

other changes
* Negative page numbers are handled by changing them to 1 (still have to handle too high page numbers in controller)

TODO
* Allow easy use of images for first, previous, and last links
* Add tests

Any suggestions or constructive criticism are welcome.

= The will_paginate Ruby library

Pagination is just limiting the number of records loaded and displayed. Why should you let it get in
your way while developing?

This is how you paginate on an ActiveRecord model:

  Post.paginate :page => 1, :order => 'created_at DESC'

Most of the time it's as simple as replacing "find" with "paginate" and specifying the page you want.

Some resources to get you started:

* The {will_paginate project page}[http://mislav.github.com/will_paginate/];
* Your mind reels with questions? Join our {Google group}[http://groups.google.com/group/will_paginate];
* {How to report bugs}[http://github.com/mislav/will_paginate/wikis/report-bugs];
* {Watch the will_paginate screencast}[http://railscasts.com/episodes/51] by Ryan Bates.

== I'm not using Rails; can I still use will_paginate?

Absolutely -- although will_paginate started off as a Rails plugin, now it is a <em>completely
framework-agnostic</em> library with support for Rails and Merb built-in. The core library doesn't
have any dependences and you can safely use it in any Ruby code.

When will_paginate is loaded in an environment where ActiveRecord and ActionView are present, it
automatically hooks into these frameworks to provide easy pagination on your models and in your
views. The same mechanism works for Merb applications, too. But, if no known framework is present
then you have absolute control over what parts of will_paginate do you want to load and where you want
them mixed in.


== Installation

The recommended way is that you get the gem hosted on {gems.github.com}[http://gems.github.com/]:

  gem install mislav-will_paginate

In <b>Rails 2.1</b>, add a gem dependency:

  # for Rails 2.1 and newer
  config.gem 'mislav-will_paginate', :lib => 'will_paginate', :version => '~> 3.0'

If you're using Rails 2.0 or older, or any other Ruby framework, just add a simple require to a file
that initializes your application. For example, in Rails you would put this at the end of
"config/environment.rb".

  gem 'mislav-will_paginate', '~> 3.0'
  require 'will_paginate'

That's it. Remember to install the gem on <strong>all</strong> machines that you are deploying to.

<i>There are extensive {installation
instructions}[http://github.com/mislav/will_paginate/wikis/installation] on {the
wiki}[http://github.com/mislav/will_paginate/wikis].</i>


== Example usage

Typical usage involves a paginating find in the controller:
  
  @posts = Post.paginate :page => params[:page], :order => 'updated_at DESC'

It's true: +paginate+ works just like +find+ -- it just doesn't fetch all the records. Don't forget
to tell it which page you want, or it will complain! Read more in WillPaginate::Finders.

Render the posts in your view like you would normally do, and when you need to render pagination,
just stick this in:

  <%= will_paginate @posts %>

You're done. Read more in WillPaginate::ViewHelpers::Base.

How does it know how much items to fetch per page? It asks your model by calling its
+per_page+ class method. You can define it like this:

  class Post < ActiveRecord::Base
    self.per_page = 50
  end

... or don't worry about it at all. WillPaginate defines it to be <strong>30</strong> by default. You can
always specify the count explicitly when calling +paginate+:

  Post.paginate :page => params[:page], :per_page => 50

The +paginate+ finder wraps the original finder and returns your result set that now has some new
properties. You can use the collection as you would use any other array. WillPaginate view helpers
also need that collection object to be able to render pagination:

  <ol>
    <% for post in @posts -%>
      <li>Render `post` in some nice way.</li>
    <% end -%>
  </ol>

  <p>Now let's render us some pagination!</p>
  <%= will_paginate @posts %>


== Authors and credits

The original author of will_paginate was PJ Hyett, who later handed over development to Mislav
Marohnić. (The library was completely rewritten since then.)

All these people helped making will_paginate what it is now with their code contributions or just
simply awesome ideas:

Chris Wanstrath, Dr. Nic Williams, K. Adam Christensen, Mike Garey, Bence Golda, Matt Aimonetti,
Charles Brian Quinn, Desi McAdam, James Coglan, Matijs van Zuijlen, Maria, Brendan Ribera, Todd
Willey, Bryan Helmkamp, Jan Berkel, Lourens Naudé, Rick Olson, Russell Norris, Piotr Usewicz, Chris
Eppstein, Brandon Arbini, Denis Barushev, Paul Barry, Ben Pickles, Ken Collins, Lida Tang and Pieter
Noordhuis.


== Usable pagination in the UI

There are example CSS styles to get you started on the will_paginate project page.

More reading about pagination as design pattern:

* {Pagination 101}[http://kurafire.net/log/archive/2007/06/22/pagination-101];
* {Pagination gallery}[http://www.smashingmagazine.com/2007/11/16/pagination-gallery-examples-and-good-practices/] featured on Smashing Magazine;
* {Pagination design pattern}[http://developer.yahoo.com/ypatterns/parent.php?pattern=pagination] on Yahoo Design Pattern Library.

Want to discuss, request features, ask questions? Join the {Google
group}[http://groups.google.com/group/will_paginate]	.